The next Kumbh Mela will be held in 2021 in Haridwar, a religious event which will be attended by millions of devotees around the world. The Kumbh Mela is held at one of the four holy pilgrimage destinations, Haridwar, Nashik, Allahabad and Ujjain, every 12 years by rotation. The dates for a pilgrimage to the Kumbh Mela are determined according to the Vikram Samvat calendar. At the Kumbh Mela Haridwar, millions of people will gather to take a dip in the holy River Ganges. The dates for the Kumbh Mela 2021 have been announced. Kumbh Mela 2021 will begin on 14th January, on the auspicious occasion of Makar Sankranti. The first Shahi Snan will take place on 11th March, and the second and third ones on 12 and 14th April respectively. The fourth Shahi Snan will be held on 27th April, and on the same day, the Haridwar Kumbh Mela 2021 will come to an end.

Crazy and chaotic are the words that best define the Kumbh Mela. Amidst the intermittent chanting of mantras, the heart rendering dance of the Aghoris and the holy ghats lit up with fiery diyas, you will have no chance but to go with the flow. The Kumbh Mela, will not just lend you with a day’s feeling but a mind boggling experience of a lifetime.

Swarming like fireflies towards a bulbous giant, millions of zealous devotees come together to wash their sins during the Kumbh Mela.The origin of these mammoth spiritual gatherings can be traced back to the existence of Demons and Gods on earth. As per the Hindu mythology Kumbh derived from the Sanskrit word ‘pitcher’ had the ‘Amrita’ the immortal nectar that had appeared during the ‘Samudramanthan’. It is believed that the Gods and the demons had churned the milky ocean to obtain the same.

One among the most euphoric religious event in India, the Kumbh Mela is celebrated four times in every twelve years. Herds of sadhus and devotees crowd the sanctified pavilions to be a part of the ‘world’s massive act of faith.’ Kumbh Mela is considered the most auspicious time to take a dip in the sacred river to free themselves from their sins and attain a step forward towards salvation. The most popular draws of the mela are the Nagas (naked sadhus), Urdhawavahurs (who expose their body to extreme austerities) and the Kalpwasis (the ones who bathe three times a day). Apart from these, the rituals that are performed during this time are worth witnessing.

The Kumbh Mela observes the World’s largest peaceful gathering at some of the very significant destinations in the history of Hinduism. Haridwar (river Ganga), Prayag (Triveni sangam of Yamuna, Ganga and Saraswati), Ujjain (river Kshipra), and Nasik (river Godavari) are the Kumbh Mela Destinations which are said to be eternally blessed during this time.Enthusiastic Travelers and ardent roamers who yearn to explore the Cultural Heritage of India can be part of the incessant hysteria at the Kumbh.

Guidelines for Tourists Visiting Kumbh Mela in 2021
Haridwar will host the Kumbh Mela from 14th January in 2021. It will be attended by millions of devotees, including sadhus. The government, therefore, has come up with a set of COVID-19 guidelines which will have to be followed by devotees and tourists visiting the Kumbh Mela. These guidelines are mentioned below:

Devotees and tourists visiting the Kumbh Mela will have to carry a negative COVID-19 RT-PCR report. The report should have a test date 72 hours before the date of the visit. 
Use of face covers or masks will be compulsory.
All devotees will have to register with the government of Uttarakhand.
Devotees & tourists will also have to obtain a compulsory medical certificate in their state from the nearest Community Health Center/District Hospital/Medical College.
Those who are above 65 years of age, or senior citizens, pregnant women, children below 10 years of age and those with comorbid conditions like diabetes, hypertension, chronic lung disease and cancer should avoid visiting the Kumbh Mela.
Individuals should always maintain a distance of 6 feet from each other at all times. 
Wash your hands frequently with soap, even when they do not look dirty. Alcohol based sanitisers will be made available.
Spitting is strictly prohibited.
Aarogya Setu app should be installed by everybody.
These are some of the guidelines and rules which will have to be observed by everybody visiting the Kumbh Mela in Haridwar.