A comprehensive review of the Kumbh Mela: identifying risks for spread of infectious diseases


The Kumbh Mela in India is the largest mass gathering in the world which witnessed close to 100 million visitors in 2013. An event of this magnitude presents challenges. Increased population density, reduced hygienic conditions and exposure to environmental pollutants pave the way for easy transmission of pathogens. Due to the possibility of epidemics, the primary focus should be on identifying the potential risk factors and implementing appropriate preventive measures. The context of religion and psychology of the pilgrims is also closely associated with the evolution of the risk factors and so forms an important part of the discussion. We provide a brief background to the Kumbh Mela with a description of the existing and potential risk factors that require our attention.

Previous article in issueNext article in issue
Keywords
Indiainfectious diseaseKumbh Melamass gatheringpilgrimage
Introduction
Mass gatherings attract people globally and expose them to a range of health risks [1]. Communicable diseases pose a threat to global health due to international connectivity, primarily through air travel [2], [3]. Respiratory, faeco-oral, vector-borne, zoonotic, blood-borne and sexual modes of disease transmissions have been identified previously in Mass gatherings [4]. Non-communicable risks, including stampedes, heat-related illness, accidents and terrorist attacks, also pose complex public challenges including crowd control, management of health services and public security [5]. In addition, rituals in religious events, such as rolling on the floor, or bathing naked in the river early in the morning, may predispose to skin, respiratory, gastrointestinal and genitourinary infections [6].

A recent report on the Hajj emphasized the importance of advanced planning of public health surveillance and response at religious events [7]. The Ministry of Health and Ministry of Hajj provide regular updates on travel advice and health regulations for pilgrims. There are committees set up for provision of safe water and food supplies, sanitation and vector control to minimize the transmission of food- and water-borne diseases. During Hajj, transmission of respiratory viruses (influenza, rhinovirus, coronavirus 229E, respiratory syncytial virus, para-influenza and adenovirus), tuberculosis and pertussis were identified [8]. The Ministry of Health has already provided vaccine recommendations for yellow fever, invasive meningococcal diseases, influenza, polio and tuberculosis. Based on recent outbreaks, pneumococcal vaccines are under consideration [7].

Risk assessment provides a basis for risk mitigation [9] and this includes a review of setting, event, climate, likely mixing patterns, the population attending the event and possible infections [4]. The Kumbh Mela, in India, is the largest congregation of pilgrims in the world and 40 million pilgrims are expected to visit the next Mela in 2016 [10]. However, data concerning the health status of the pilgrims and potential health risks are scarce.

Materials and methods
We searched PubMed and national databases for Indian medical journals (www.medind.nic.in) for ‘Kumbh’, ‘Kumbh Mela’, ‘Hindu pilgrimage’, ‘Hindu fair’, ‘Indian pilgrimage’, ‘Indian fair’, ‘religious gathering’, and ‘Hindu mass gathering’ obtaining peer-reviewed articles on the Mela. We obtained grey literature on the history of Mela and its organization using Google search for the same terms. The search was limited to the first three pages of the results. Any news article, reports or government websites containing relevant information about the Kumbh Mela were used as information sources.

Results
History and setting of the Kumbh Mela
Kumbh in Sanskrit means pitcher and Mela means fair. In Hindu mythology, it is believed that the nectar of immortality was poured from a pitcher on four different places in India (Allahabad, Haridwar, Nasik and Ujjain), as a result of a long battle between the Gods and the Demons, which lasted 12 days and 12 nights. The Mela in its different forms alternates between these places. The Kumbh Mela happens once every 3 years in one of these locations on the banks of the corresponding rivers; Ganga in Haridwar, Godavari in Nasik, Kshipra in Ujjain and Sangam (confluence of Ganga, Yamuna and mythical Saraswati rivers) in Allahabad (Fig. 1). The Ardh (half) Kumbh is held every 6 years in Haridwar and Allahabad. The Purna (full) Kumbh and the Maha Kumbh (great/supreme pitcher) are held every 12 years and every 144 years, respectively, only in Allahabad (9). The Sangam, a place where the rivers meet in Allahabad, is very auspicious according to Hindu mythology and people believe that one dip in the waters of the Sangam at a precise moment in time can wash away all of a person's sins [11]. The total number of auspicious days varies depending on the total duration of the festival. In 2013, the festival in Allahabad lasted for 55 days with six important bathing days attracting close to 100 million people [12] (FIG. 2, FIG. 3).