India's famous religious congregation, the 'Kumbh Mela' is in full swing at Haridwar, Uttarakhand. On
Monday, devotees took a holy dip in River Ganga at Har Ki Pauri on the occasion of the second 'shahi
snan' in Kumbh.

However, this is happening at a time when the nation is going through its second peak which is proving
to be much worse than the rst. Uttarakhand itself reported 1,333 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday taking
the total number of the cases in the state to 1,08,812. The active cases in the state now stand at 7,323.

Kumbh Mela Inspector General (IG) Sanjay Gunjyal also admitted that it is difcult to ensure social distancing norms during the second 'Shahi snan'.
Notifications P
x
owered by iZooto
"We are continuously appealing to people to follow COVID-19 appropriate behaviour. But due to the huge
crowd, it is practically not possible to issue challans today. It is very difcult to ensure social distancing at
ghats," Gunjyal said.

"A stampede-like situation may arise if we would try to enforce social distancing at ghats so we are unable to enforce social distancing here," he said.
While Kumbh is going viral on Twitter due to devotees putting out tweets appreciating the festival, there
are also people who are criticising the holy gathering. Several have taken to Twitter to express their concern about COVID-19 spreading further at Kumbh due to the lack of norms being followed.
The controversy doesn't end here. Many are also relating this event to the Islamic congregation 'Tablighi
Jamaat' that attracted a lot of negative attention last April. The national media criticised the Jamaat at
length alleging that the Jamaat's irresponsible gathering spread COVID0-19 in the nation. Cases were
also led against those who attended the congregation.

Many are pointing out that the same national media that day and night bashed the Jamaat on Television
is now quiet about the enormous crowd at Kumbh.
On the other hand, others believe that this debate is being carried out solely to defame Hinduism and its
festivals. A religious and political controversy is thus being played out on Twitter.
Here's what people are saying.
More is known about the virus today than last year. More is known about treatment today than last year.
Current case load is higher than last year. If Tablighi Jamaat was bad, Kumbh Mela is a borderline crime.
Those who approved, chose to ignore guidelines must be behind bars.
— Hardik Rajgor (@Hardism)
Why is the Tablighi Jamaat still the byword for all extra-crowded religious congregations that are breaking
COVID protocols? Their mistimed congregation happened once while India was just preparing to handle.
The current ones are happening knowingly amidst a vicious second wave.
— Shivam Bahuguna (@JanusBlinked)
Lutyens Media Gang started targetting Kumb Mela "Shahi Snan" just to defame Hindu rituals.
But they were unanimously quiet during Tablighi Jamaat incident last year. Bloody Hypocrites â
— VICTIM CARD DESTRÃYER | Kai Hiwatari Stan | (@Victim_Card_)
This is just horrible.

How is it any different from the Tablighi Jamat people? Both should be arrested with serious charges
against them.
— Nidhi Shankar (@BoldMonk_)
The rst lock down failed because of Tablighi Jamaat
We could have stopped the pandemic from spreading in India in the very beginning. But Tablighi Jamaat
carried the virus to the remotest villages.
And now we have to take slys from penny stock journalists on our H festivals
— Yoda à¿ð (@saffron_yoda)
"Do gaz ki doori" is not applicable here because this is not
And where is godi media ?
— Tauqueer Sidd ØªÙÙÙØ± ØµÙØ¯ (@tauqueer_sidd)
Tablighi Jamaat were hounded for a meet organised when Govt was saying âCorona is not a health
emergencyâ and total cases were less than 5000. Today when Cases are in Lakhs everyday, Kumbh
Jamaat and Shahi Snan Jamaat have gathered in Lakhs to spread Covid all over India
— Mohammad Saddam Mujeeb (@iamsaddammujeeb)
Tablighi Jamaat violating guidelines ð
— Noman (@nomansiddiqui)
https://t.co/NWv1jlbeFM
April 12, 2021
https://t.co/mmWq8cvUH7
April 12, 2021
#Tablighi_Jamaat@sakshijoshii@rohini_sgh@sushant_says
pic.twitter.com/sFYktVxYom

Someone stop these Tablighi Jamaat people.. Oh wait...
— Harneet Singh (@Harneetsin)
They are performing their rituals under the boundaries of Law&Order.. Tablighi Jamaat performed unnecessary gathering under the strict lockdown. Only a fool will compare Tablighis to these Law abiding saints.
Note: All these participants thested Negative before this practice.
— Dr. Aman Nagar, CFA (@AmanSinghNagar)
Nation owes an unconditional apology to Tablighi Jamaat
— Asheem PK (@peekeymon)
Journos like Sudhir Chaudhary who criticized Tablighi congregation last year.
has maintained absolute silence on MahaKumbh congregation this year.
— Nita Thakur (@nithakur0)


